---
title: Should you do anything about a productive but overleveled employee? 
description: "hint: yes"
createdDate: 02/22/2024
tags: 
    - performance_management
    - culture
    - values
---
At some point in your managerial life, you may find yourself in a situation where someone on your team is over-leveled. Their compensation or title is meaningfully higher than what their impact merits. Maybe you overestimated their seniority when hiring them. Maybe you inherited a team where a previous manager gave them a promotion or a raise they weren’t ready for. Or maybe your company rewrote your previous career ladder and had to re-rank everyone on the new ladder and it turned out that some people’s salaries or titles were previously inflated. Point is: someone’s title or compensation is seriously higher than what their impact justifies. What do you do?

This isn’t complicated if the person is significantly underperforming or adding no or negative value. The solution is to let them go. 

Where this gets interesting is when someone is performing reasonably well at a level _lower_ than the one the company expects from them. For example, your staff engineer is performing like a senior engineer, or your director is performing more like a manager. It’s not that they’re doing _nothing_ well - they may be doing a lot of good in your organization, but they’re not quite up to par to their official level. And if it weren’t for this pesky over-leveling thing, you might even be perfectly happy to have them perform at their current level indefinitely at your company. So what do you do? 

Should you even do anything at all? 

It’s important that you do, for a number of reasons. 

First, you’re indirectly setting the bar across your org for what’s expected from that role.  Culture is how your company behaves, not what you believe or say. So regardless of what your career ladder document says about the bar required from a staff engineer, the _real_ bar in people’s minds is, approximately, the average of the people currently in that role. If you have 5 staff engineers, all of whom are exceptional, then everyone will intuitively know, without even _looking_ at your career ladder, that you need to be truly exceptional to get to that level. If you have 1 exceptional staff engineer and 4 average ones, people will intuitively know that the bar is not that high. This is true even if levels aren’t public within your company, because _someone_ at your company is responsible for deciding people’s levels (probably a committee of managers or senior employees), and _they’re_ going to compare promotion candidates with people already holding that title. 

If anything, you as a leader should behave as if the bar is set at the _minimum_ level of everyone with that title, not the average, because that’s how a lot of promotion cases might get argued. A manager thinks their report is doing a great job, wants to reward them, and argues that “if so and so is a staff engineer, and my report is doing at least as good of a job as them, they should be promoted to the same level”. This reasoning is theoretically sound, but only if the minimum level of a staff engineer at your company basically never drops. Otherwise you’re just watering down what it means to be a staff engineer (or whatever other level you’re talking about). 

The second reason you should handle this situation is a lot more pragmatic: what happens if people find out about this person’s compensation? Would they think it’s fair? Would they continue to trust you and believe that you have their best interest in mind? Would they continue to feel motivated to do their work? This is a great litmus test I learned from a mentor of mine, Jeremy Lizt, for whether your compensation or leveling is fair: if a spreadsheet containing the level and compensation of every employee in your organization were to leak, would you be willing to publicly look your people in the eye and stand by every number on that spreadsheet? If the answer is no, then you should address the situation until the answer is yes. Because as much as companies try to keep these things private, the reality is that people talk amongst themselves about these things. Documents could be seen by someone who’s not supposed to. Private conversations could be overheard. So you should behave as if one day, that spreadsheet will leak out. 

Even ignoring all these practicalities, assuming you could somehow guarantee no one would know that someone is overcompensated or over-leveled, you should still do something because _you_ know about it. You can’t lead with integrity if you knowingly allow a double standard just for convenience. So you need to do something. 

So how should you handle this?

Generally speaking, this will look very similar to how you’d handle any underperformance situation. 

Before you actually do anything, as with anything performance management related, you should make sure your manager is aware of what’s happening and that you have their support.  Not only will they probably have a useful perspective, but they likely also need to fulfill some mechanical requirements like inform HR or have a paper trail of what’s happening.

The first thing you then need to do is be absolutely clear with the employee that their performance does not meet the required bar for their role and explain the performance level they need to reach. This can be especially difficult if this person is adding a lot of value but at a lower impact level. If it helps you think through things, write up your feedback and share it prior to your in person conversation with the employee. But this step needs to be done well, because the worst thing you can do to someone who needs to improve their performance is ruin their chances for improvement by not even letting them know they need to do it and the level they need to reach. 

Since the employee is doing well at a lower level than their official one, you could theoretically offer the employee a chance to get “demoted” if they think they can’t or don’t want to hit the improvement goals, but I don’t recommend it. It’s possible that this might work for someone somewhere, but in my experience it’s very difficult for an employee to have their salary or title reduced and still have the same level of motivation or excitement about their work (unless they specifically asked for less responsibility after doing a good job in their role). For that reason I don’t recommend this option. 

The goals you set with the employee should be time-bound. That is, you should set a very clear timeline where they need to hit the performance goals or otherwise you should part ways. Otherwise it might be tempting to procrastinate taking action, and you risk incurring the negative costs of inaction that motivated you to do something about this in the first place. Once that time period elapses, you should make a firm decision one way or another. If the employee hit their goals, fantastic for everyone involved. If they didn’t, then the optimal long term outcome is to part ways. 

Unfortunately, my feeling is that it’s harder for someone to hit this kind of improvement goal than if they were just underperforming in a role they’ve successfully done before (like a senior engineer changing companies but just taking a longer time to adapt to the new company). In a way, you’re asking someone to grow their skills, in a very short amount of time (a few months at most), enough to earn a promotion that would have normally taken them a year or more. This will rarely work. People generally take at least a year, often more, to grow from one level to the next. So unfortunately, if you find yourself in this situation, it’s most likely that this will not work out. For this reason, when you share the improvement expectations with the employee, you should also give them an “easy out” where they can just resign and we don’t have to go through a painful which will likely end with the same outcome.

If you do your best to uphold a high standard of meritocracy in your company, you should ideally never find yourself in this position. Promotions should have a high bar. Your leveling in the hiring process should also be risk averse and only hire people at levels where you’re pretty sure they have what it takes. But no company is perfect and you may very well find yourself having to resolve this. While it’s never fun, it’s critical for maintaining meritocracy as an invariant of your company culture. The alternative is a watering down of a high performance culture.
